jintur-selu

Jintur is a city and a municipal council in Parbhani district in the Indian state of Maharashtra.
As population of 2001 India census,[2] Jintur had a population of 38,109. Males constitute 52% of the population and females 48%. Jintur has an average literacy rate of 63%, higher than the national average of 59.5%: male literacy is 69%, and female literacy is 56%. In Jintur, 16% of the population is under 6 years of age.

Sailu is a city and a municipal council in Parbhani district in the Indian state of Maharashtra. Sailu is the Taluka place in Parbhani District. Earlier The Sailu Taluka was attached with Pathri Constituency. The Maharashtra Govt. has restructured the constituencies and Sailu Taluka is now attached with Jintoor Vidhan Sabha Constituency

Geography

Jintur is located at 19.62°N 76.7°E.[1] It has an average elevation of 455 metres (1492 feet).

Sailu is located at 19.442°N 76.429°E.[2] It has an average elevation of 415 metres (1361 feet).

Sailu is referred in many places as 'Selu'. Selu is the city having full of prosperity & ancient cultural. As per Parbhani district’s history, it goes up to Stone Age. Researcher’s thinks the religions of the valley of the Godawari were very progressive. Walur, village considered as Saint Valmiki’s (Writer of Ramayana) birthplace and also Pandava were stayed here. Lingayat tradesman saint Harihar Maharaj’s birthplace is none another than Walur. As per researcher’s statement, today’s area under the Selu was included into an emperor Ashoka’s empire. After Mourya emperors decayed Satwahan, Rashtrakut, Wakatak and Devgiri’s Yadav this area was under these rulers. At the period of Yadav’s there was a Hemadri (Hemandpanti) architect whose architecture was considered as sect of Hemand architecture. At Walur, Hatnur, Chikalthana, Kundi here present God Shiva’s temple was Hemand sect type of art. Into the surround of Walur there are lonely little hills present. This area was purified by Mahanubhav’s sect i.e. the lord of Chakradhar through his wandering. We have given much more information in ‘History of Selu’. Our Selu Taluka is having great historical background. Selu Area played an important role in Marathwada Mukti Sangram.

The geographical area of the city is 1,54,703 hectare. It is 19°27 and 76°27 of latitude and longitude. This city is progressed because of connectivity by road and Railway track. Moregaon village is near from this city and Dhudhana River is flowing by this village. In 1979 government has given permission to build L.D.P. (Lower Dhudhana Project) dam near to Bramhawakadi village, Now its near to complete. We have given all geographical information in ‘Geography’ page Deulgaon gat and Digras(j)Near Village In Selu City. Our Selu City is an Educational Hub in our area. We have got great personality like Late. Shri Ramji Bhangadia, who developed educational institution in our area. Now we getting many new institutions like B.Ed., D. Ed. Colleges, Many I.T. colleges in our area, which is really necessary for today’s youth. we have great school named "nootan mahavidyalaya"from this school many of student made their impact in different fields.We are giving all the information about educational institution of Selu Taluka in ‘Educational’ page very soon. Selu City is having many religious places, like Babasaheb Mandir (Keshavraj Babasaheb Maharaj is the Sadguru of Shri Shirdi Saibaba), Balaji Mandir, Datta Mandir,Digambar Jain Temple, Shankarling Temple, Madina Mosque, House of Buddhist Monks. For more information about these and many more places turn to ‘Religious Places & Festivals’

Selu is a Sub Division of Parbhani District, so many government offices are established in Selu. Selu is having Deputy Collector office. We are placing all needful information about Govt. and Semi Govt. office information on ‘Government Offices & Other Facilities’ page. We are publishing ‘Selu Yellow pages’ on this site. In this, we are including all information about market places and MIDC area. Rahul Arkule developed www.eselu.com and I have taken this information from this site.

Demographics

jintur
As population of 2001 India census,[2] Jintur had a population of 38,109. Males constitute 52% of the population and females 48%. Jintur has an average literacy rate of 63%, higher than the national average of 59.5%: male literacy is 69%, and female literacy is 56%. In Jintur, 16% of the population is under 6 years of age.

selu
As of 2001 India census,[3] Sailu had a population of 39,854. Males constitute 52% of the population and females 48%. Sailu has an average literacy rate of 66%, higher than the national average of 59.5%: male literacy is 74%, and female literacy is 57%. In Sailu, 14% of the population is under 6 years of age. Selu city is situated at Kachiguda to Manmad railway track, in the Parbhani district. This is an important market place in Marathwada Region. At north of the city Jintur tahasil, to the west Jalana district, to the east Parbhani tahasil And to South Gangakhed tahasil are present.

In this region many wild animals can see like Fox, Hyena, Wolf etc. Some birds like Pigeon, White and Black Pheasant etc. Also some types of poisonous and non-poisonous Snakes can see in this area. Poisonous snakes are like Manyar, Cobra, Furse, Ghonas and non-poisonous snakes are like Dhaman, Ajgar, Mandol, etc.

Trees like Mango, Tamarind, Neem/Nimb, Gum-Arabic etc. occurs in this region.

The majority production of crop is Jowar, Cotton, Wheat and Mug in Selu tahasil. In this tahasil quantity of cotton is main crop therefore many ginning and pressing factories are established in this area. River water, hand-pumps and wells water is used to drinking water in this city. Agricultural produces are in large scale in this area, hence we see the well growth of agri base industries i.e.Ginning Pressing Factories, Oil Mills, Dall Mills etc. Unfortunately not a single sugar factory in Sailu Taluka. The farmers most need of the sugar factory in this region.

A main way goes form Selu is Jalana to Nanded. Selu is a main station of south- central Railways in Maharashtra region.Devnanandra Co-operative sugar factory is very near to this Selu city.

Selu Municipality is established in 1957 and on 15 August 1992 Selu is declared as a Tahasil.

